Add cookbook - How to use scala-cli in GH actions (#1031)
VirtusLab/scala-cli: website/docs/cookbooks/gh-action.md

---
title: Use Scala CLI in GitHub Actions
sidebar_position: 9
---

## Preparing simple aplication

`scala-cli` lets you run, test, and package Scala code in various environments, including GitHub CI. 
To use Scala CLI features in a simple way you can use the GitHub Actions [scala-cli-setup](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli-setup) that installs everything necessary to run your Scala CLI application and more.

For example, here's a simple `ls` application printing the files in a given directory:
```scala title=Ls.scala
//> using scala "2.13"
//> using lib "com.lihaoyi::os-lib:0.7.8"

@main def hello(args: String*) =
  val path = args.headOption match
    case Some(p) => os.Path(p, os.pwd)
    case _       => os.pwd

  if (os.isDir(path)) println(os.list(path).mkString(","))

>   else System.err.println("Expected directory path as a input")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  else System.err.println("Expected directory path as an input")
```

```

and some tests for `ls` application:

```scala title=TestsLs.test.scala
//> using lib "org.scalameta::munit::0.7.27"
import scala.util.Properties

class TestsLs extends munit.FunSuite {
  test("ls") {
    // prepare test directory
    val tempDir = os.temp.dir()
    // create files

>     val exptectedFiles = Seq("Ls", "Hello").map(tempDir / _)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    val expectedFiles = Seq("Ls", "Hello").map(tempDir / _)
```

>     exptectedFiles.foreach(os.write(_, "Hello"))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    expectedFiles.foreach(os.write(_, "Hello"))
```

    // check
    val scalaCLILauncher = if(Properties.isWin) "scala-cli.bat" else "scala-cli"
    val foundFiles =
      os.proc(scalaCLILauncher, "Ls.scala", "--", tempDir).call().out.text().trim

>     exptectedFiles.map(_.toString).foreach { file =>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    expectedFiles.map(_.toString).foreach { file =>
```

      assert(foundFiles.contains(file))
    }
  }
}

```

## Run tests in Github CI

The following configuration of `ci.yml` contains a definition of job that runs tests using `scala-cli` for every platform defined in `matrix.OS`.

```yaml
jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ${{ matrix.OS }}
    strategy:
      matrix:
        OS: ["ubuntu-latest", "macos-latest", "windows-latest"]
    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      with:
        fetch-depth: 0
    - uses: coursier/cache-action@v6.3
    - uses: VirtusLab/scala-cli-setup@v0.1
    - run: scala-cli test .
```

> ## Test your scala code style

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't "check code formatting" or "check code format" sound better for this?
```suggestion
## Check your Scala code format
```

> To test the code style of your application, you can use [Scalafmt](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To check the code style of your sources, you can use [Scalafmt](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/). 
```

Before running Scalafmt, you need to create a `.scalafmt.conf` configuration file:

```scala
version = 3.5.2
runner.dialect = scala3
```

> and then test your code style in GitHub CI by adding new job `format`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and then check your code format in GitHub CI by adding new job `format`:
```

---
title: Use Scala CLI in GitHub Actions
sidebar_position: 9
---

## Preparing simple aplication

> `scala-cli` lets you run, test, and package Scala code in various environments, also in GitHub CI. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`scala-cli` lets you run, test, and package Scala code in various environments, including GitHub CI. 
```

> To use Scala CLI features in a simple way you can use the GitHub Actions [scala-cli-setup](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli-setup) that installs everything necessary to run the Scala application and more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use Scala CLI features in a simple way you can use the GitHub Actions [scala-cli-setup](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli-setup) that installs everything necessary to run your Scala CLI application and more.
```

> For example, here's a simple `ls` application to printing the files in the given directory:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, here's a simple `ls` application printing the files in a given directory:
```

```scala title=Ls.scala
//> using scala "2.13"
//> using lib "com.lihaoyi::os-lib:0.7.8"

@main def hello(args: String*) =
  val path = args.headOption match
    case Some(p) => os.Path(p, os.pwd)
    case _       => os.pwd

  if (os.isDir(path)) println(os.list(path).mkString(","))
  else System.err.println("Expected directory path as a input")
```

and some tests for `ls` application:

```scala title=TestsLs.test.scala
//> using lib "org.scalameta::munit::0.7.27"
import scala.util.Properties

class TestsLs extends munit.FunSuite {
  test("ls") {
    // prepare test directory
    val tempDir = os.temp.dir()
    // create files
    val exptectedFiles = Seq("Ls", "Hello").map(tempDir / _)
    exptectedFiles.foreach(os.write(_, "Hello"))

    // check
    val scalaCLILauncher = if(Properties.isWin) "scala-cli.bat" else "scala-cli"
    val foundFiles =
      os.proc(scalaCLILauncher, "Ls.scala", "--", tempDir).call().out.text().trim

    exptectedFiles.map(_.toString).foreach { file =>
      assert(foundFiles.contains(file))
    }
  }
}

```

## Run tests in Github CI

> The following configuration of `ci.yml` contains a definition of job that run tests using `scala-cli` for every platform defined in `matrix.OS`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following configuration of `ci.yml` contains a definition of job that runs tests using `scala-cli` for every platform defined in `matrix.OS`.
```

```yaml
jobs:
  build:
    runs-on: ${{ matrix.OS }}
    strategy:
      matrix:
        OS: ["ubuntu-latest", "macos-latest", "windows-latest"]
    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      with:
        fetch-depth: 0

>         submodules: true

Reviewer 2: I don't think we need this one (it's a bit superfluous here, the example app doesn't use git submodules). 
```suggestion
```

`fetch-depth` could be removed, but it's useful if users publish with Scala CLI, so we might as well keep this one.

    - uses: coursier/cache-action@v6.3
    - uses: VirtusLab/scala-cli-setup@v0.1
    - run: scala-cli test .
```

## Test your scala code style

> To test you code style of your application you can use [Scalafmt](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To test the code style of your application, you can use [Scalafmt](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/). 
```

> Before running using `Scalafmt` there is needed to create the `.scalafmt.conf` configuration file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before running Scalafmt, you need to create a `.scalafmt.conf` configuration file:
```

```scala
version = 3.5.2
runner.dialect = scala3
```

> and then test your code style in GitHub CI by adding new job `check`:
> ```yaml
>   check:

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't `format` sound more natural for this one?
```suggestion
and then test your code style in GitHub CI by adding new job `format`:
```yaml
  format:
```

    runs-on: "ubuntu-latest"
    steps:
    - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      with:
        fetch-depth: 0

>         submodules: true

Reviewer 2: Same as above (shouldn't be needed)
```suggestion
```

    - uses: coursier/cache-action@v6.3
    - uses: VirtusLab/scala-cli-setup@v0.1
    - name: Scalafmt check
      run: |
        scala-cli fmt --check . || (
          echo "To format code run"
          echo "  scala-cli fmt ."
          exit 1
        )
```

> If `scala-cli fmt --check .` command fails, it can be easily fixed by running `scala-cli fmt .` which correctly formats your code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the `scala-cli fmt --check .` command fails, it can be easily fixed by running `scala-cli fmt .`, which correctly formats your code.
```

## Package your application

> Scala CLI allows to build native executable applications using [GraalVM](https://www.graalvm.org), which later will be uploaded to artifacts in GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scala CLI allows to build native executable applications using [GraalVM](https://www.graalvm.org), which can be uploaded as GitHub release artifacts.
```

```scala title=package.sc
//> using scala "3.1.2"
//> using lib "com.lihaoyi::os-lib:0.8.0"
import scala.util.Properties

val platformSuffix: String = {
  val os =
    if (Properties.isWin) "pc-win32"
    else if (Properties.isLinux) "pc-linux"
    else if (Properties.isMac) "apple-darwin"
    else sys.error(s"Unrecognized OS: ${sys.props("os.name")}")
  os
}
val artifactsPath = os.Path("artifacts", os.pwd)
val destPath =
  if (Properties.isWin) artifactsPath / s"ls-$platformSuffix.exe"
  else artifactsPath / s"ls-$platformSuffix"
val scalaCLILauncher =
  if (Properties.isWin) "scala-cli.bat" else "scala-cli"

os.makeDir(artifactsPath)
os.proc(scalaCLILauncher, "package", ".", "-o", destPath, "--native-image")
  .call(cwd = os.pwd)
  .out
  .text()
  .trim
```

## Distribute generated native application

To upload generated native executable applications to artifacts you can use [upload-artifact](https://github.com/actions/upload-artifact) GitHub Actions.

```yaml
    - uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
      with:
        name: launchers
        path: artifacts
        if-no-files-found: error
        retention-days: 2
```

> When release CI pass, you should be able to download artifacts that containing native launchers of your applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When release CI pass, you should be able to download artifacts that contain native launchers of your applications.
```

> [Here](https://github.com/lwronski/ls-scala-cli-demo/actions/runs/2367009955) you can find examples of a CI that contains generated launcher based on this one cookbook.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Here](https://github.com/lwronski/ls-scala-cli-demo/actions/runs/2367009955) you can find examples of a CI that contains generated launcher based on this cookbook.
```

> Written code in this cookbook you can find [here](https://github.com/lwronski/ls-scala-cli-demo).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find the code of this cookbook [here](https://github.com/lwronski/ls-scala-cli-demo).
```
